No, we'll start with that.
I'm talking to Carrie Gibbons.
Did you know that that book in particular has been written?
Yes.
I know that I'm not that one in particular.
How do you, let's just start.
If you don't mind, we'll just enter the conversation.
What kind of resonances do you think are there in that novel that might
make it appropriate are good for younger students to read?
I think it's good for younger students to read because the protagonist acts thoroughly.
Her actions are dictated from her own heart, not from peer pressure.
So it's a good book to teach a child how to be an individual.
And she has her own individual style.
So it's a good book in which to learn that.
And it has things to say about race that are important to hear.
I think it deals very honestly with race.
And my own children will be reading it in school.
It's assigned at home.
So I'm sure when they do, I'll be show and tell.
Sure.
Well, I guess.
My younger daughter is entering eighth grade, so this was summer reading for her.
She had to read it this summer.
It was kind of cute.
I started walking around with this book.
I thought it was my book.
Maybe she'd grab for this interview.
I said, I'd like to hear that woman.
She talked very intelligently about her book.
That's good to hear.
Yeah, it is.
It's amazing to me and gratifying, I think, that because that book is narrated by a younger person, that it was not marketed as a young adult book.
I've heard it said that if Catcher in the Rye were to be written today, it would be classified as a young adult novel, if only because the protagonist is a young person.
How do you feel about that?
I'm delighted that that was able to transcend it.
I am too.
I had much rather that it be sold primarily as a book for adults and then meander its way down the... through an age barrier, actually, which is, you know, about 19 or 20.
People start reading different books.
Sure.
So...
Do you have a sense of your reader?
You've written quite a few books now.
I do.
She's about 40 and she's got a child or three children and she works.
That's about who it is.
She's definitely a she.
She.
I'm having more and more men come to the readings.
And that fascinates me, and I may start asking them why, because I want to know.
Does it fascinate you, or surprise you, or both?
It surprises me, I think.
Why would it surprise you?
Because these books are so strongly about women, and they have such a strong appeal to women that it would
I ran into a woman who liked Tom Clancy.
You know?
Except that, with all due respect, Tom Clancy is really not, in my view, certainly, and I think most reasonable critics, what you'd call a literary writer.
I mean, he writes entertainment and stuff.
I do sense, and the critics undoubtedly agree, that you are striving for something
I'm striving for something a little bit higher than that.
Yes, I am.
I'd like to know that I'm picking up more and more male readers.
My husband was reading my books long before we met.
So, he was like, Honey, why did you read my books before we met?
Can you think and tell us when you come out?
Okay.
In addition to the perceived audience, do you also identify yourself as a, quote, Southern writer or whatever that entails?
I think of myself as a writer who lives in the South and writes about the South primarily.
But I don't think of myself as a regional writer, writing books that deal primarily with the issues of that region.
One of the reasons is because the issues that are in play in the South are in play everywhere else.
The South doesn't have its own set of peculiar problems anymore.
But you certainly emerged from how distinctively or traditionally.
Oh, yes.
We were at Faulkner's house last week.
And I guess I didn't realize until I went to his house that he's the most written about writer with the exception of Shakespeare.
I don't know why I thought it might.
I don't know who else I thought it might be, but...
which is amazing, isn't it, because in his lifetime, so many of his books went out of print, and he had to be rediscovered.
And The Sound and the Fury was called a major blow-up by a minor talent.
Yeah, well, you know, I collect books for various bizarre reasons of 19th century literary criticism of American books, and not just criticism, but
literary studies, and it's amazing.
I have yet to find a book published while Melville was alive that has anything at all to say about it, let alone anything good or bad.
I mean, he was totally dismissed in his lifetime.
He had to wait until the 1920s to be rediscovered, so what some newspaper critic might say is quite irrelevant to the whole thing.
You obviously have no trouble assuming
the voice of an adolescent in your fiction, and that you were able to do this in your first book, and that you're actually going to do it again in this book.
Tell me about that.
I mean, obviously, it doesn't seem to date you at all.
You don't find that formidable.
Well, I enjoy reading first person, Studs Terkel, transcribed narrative.
Like the good boy, for example, had a great impact on me.
I did an interview on his show a couple years ago, and I've got a reading with him Saturday night.
Oh, really?
I'll tell him that you didn't torture me or anything.
No, I'm not.
I do this today by living.
Anyway, they had a profound influence because I understood
through reading them that the human voice could be an artistic instrument and could be used.
And I didn't have to create, thank you, create distance with a third person narrator in order to tell a story.
And also I have children of my own and I was just looking through a catalog to order fall clothes before he came in.
And so it's really not hard for me to assume the voice of a child.
And your children are, I think you have three girls, is that right?
I have three girls.
Yeah, I have two girls.
So that helps, I'm sure, when you're... I'm sure you can just kind of listen in and pick up certain things that... Does that help you at all?
It really does.
It does.
This is my husband, Frank Ward.
So why did you read my book?
Because Eudora Welty and Walker Percy told me to.
And because I wanted to be prepared when I met you.
But you knew you were going to meet her.
Oh, yes.
That was necessary.
Is that right?
You're from...
from the same part of the country, I guess.
I have to say that I quite agree with your husband.
I mean, I think anything that Walker Percy or Eudora Welty... I don't want to pay much stock in blurbs, I have to say, but on the other hand, I think that anything that Walker Percy has recommended, I don't think he'd recommend anything that he didn't believe in, or Eudora Welty.
And I have to say those endorsements
carry a great deal of weight.
And also I heard she was scared.
Would you like me to order some coffee?
No, no, thanks.
I had some in the way.
I'm sorry.
Do you see, no, this is five books now, I guess.
Five.
And you're in your thirties.
Thirty-five.
Wow.
I've also read that you decided to be a writer.
This isn't something that you felt impelled to do, which is kind of different from all the writers that I've interviewed over the years.
So many describe the process of obsession or being drawn or whatever, but I guess that's not the case.
No, I was going to continue in school and get my PhD and teach.
American literature or, yeah, I was much more interested in American literature.
And that was the track that I had laid down for myself.
And I wrote Ellen Foster and it was published.
And that was by Algonquin.
Algonquin.
And I realized that I could make a living doing this.
And it was fun.
I knew how to do it.
It wasn't back-breaking.
And I could do it and be at home with my children or my child at the time.
So it seemed like the best of all possible careers.
So I stopped going to school and started writing full-time.
So, pardon me, but you had this
most unusual experience of really not suffering the sting of rejection, I gather.
It was very unusual.
I will never get that lucky again.
Was this the case?
Did you have an agent?
Did you place it yourself with Ogonquin?
I showed the pages myself to my teacher and then we found an agent while I was a student.
At UNC in a
class called The History of Southern Literature.
Not in writing class, because I don't believe in them.
I've read that.
I've read that actually you feel you can identify books that have emerged from workshops.
And I think I can do that myself.
Yeah.
Especially if they're written about the English department.
That's a dead giveaway, isn't it?
Flannery O'Connor was once asked at University of Chicago if she thought writing programs stifled young people, and she said, I don't think it stifles enough of them.
You affected that accent.
I love Flannery.
I wish I could afford her.
Thank God, a wise lad for me.
For my anniversary last year.
You're a collector, I gather.
I have a book out just now with Holt on bibliomania.
Oh, you do?
Yeah, I've had a couple of, just getting reviewed now.
Wonderful review of the Washington Post.
We have, I think, between 4,000 and 4,200.
Okay.
First edition?
Mostly.
Well, what do you collect?
Anything.
We're trying to finish the Wellkies and...
What would you say we collect?
We like first births?
Ms.
Walter's photographs.
I have Ms.
I have, I think, one of the great, I don't know, I'm being a modest here in character, but one of the great Walker Percy collect to take everything, including his first published work which preceded
the moviegoer by five years, signed by him, moviegoer with two dust jackets, you know.
I have all of his Uncle Will's stuff signed.
I have to say it's wonderful, wonderful.
When you said Walker Percy, I said, well, we're talking, you know.
He has written a book on Biblia Madness.
Oh, it's just out.
It's called A Gentle Madness.
He's had some wonderful reviews.
Well, Woodford's mind is
Oh, yeah, it's got a wonderful dust jacket.
It's a book fool.
It's a spectacular jacket for me.
It started printing already within the first month of publication.
I'm not here to talk about my book, but I did notice that you collect books.
That's very impressive, very.
Oh, thanks.
It's my first book at the age of 52.
I find, that's why I have to say, I find your achievements so remarkable.
And I hope you don't mind if we really don't talk that much about Watts.
That's my job.
Yeah, that's about my thing, because I don't know that much, Rob.
I have to say, fiction writers, for me, are the most challenging individuals for a variety of reasons.
I mean, nonfiction, you can talk about sort of things, but I think with an artistic work,
that behooves the reader to try and define what the process of what's going on.
But there are certain themes that we can't see through your body of work and maybe you could discuss how you see your body of work.
I mean, there are certainly patterns that recur in all of the books.
Would you agree with that?
I think so.
There's that looking for affection or looking for a home, looking for some
sort of family connection there's always a character who is in need of that um and i've just been told all this by a scholar recently who studied everything and she had one chapter called things and patterns and themes and giving his work and i read it very carefully in order to remember everything that she said so one thing she said
was just looking for attention.
And death is also important in every book.
There's always a death that informs the mood of the rest of the book.
Does that amuse you to see things, to see your work discussed in a scholarly fashion?
Oh, yes.
It pleases me because it
helps me and I feel, it's nice to know that it's being taken seriously.
Do you ever say, gee, that's right?
Yeah, about all those emerging things, especially the one about the looking for love.
I thought back and then said, yes, that's exactly.
Well, in this book, for instance, I noticed early on, I think, on page 79 or 80, you saw the narrator says, she talked about birthday presents, and what she really wants, she doesn't want a toy or something for her collection, what she really wants is her mother.
Her mother, yeah.
And that's, you know, that, that explains, that's the theme that you're talking about a long way here.
Do you see it, now you're, again, you're not,
to dwell on your age, but you are certainly a young woman with many, many years of work ahead of you.
How do you see your work developing?
Do you think that when these scholars of the next century, well into the next centuries, take a look at your body of work, do you think that they'll see something
beginning with Ellen Foster and making a general progression to the same corpus, I guess, as a... I would like for them to get denser and more complicated.
I'd like to have more characters.
I would like to write a big Civil War book, and I'm working on that right now.
Narrated?
The first person by different narrators.
different women who have to deal with Union troops in North Carolina and Georgia.
So that's going to be my big two or three year project.
Is that a challenge for you to have a number of different voices?
Oh yes.
I've done two.
It's like juggling.
I could juggle two baseballs, but now
I'll be juggling eggs and turnips and baseballs and bowling balls, and it's hard to juggle voices of varying weight and tone, but that's what I'll have to do.
Dr. Oh once told me during an interview that he likens what he does to a metrilobus, to projecting a voice.
Would you agree with that?
Oh, I think so.
I'm reading one of his books right now.
Which one?
Waterwork.
Yeah, I like that.
It's okay.
They've got mixed reviews.
I keep getting mixed up in it, and he keeps repeating himself.
I know he's looking for the father and the son, and I know.
Just go find them, don't keep saying it.
But I thought Ragtime was absolutely grand.
in a model of how to write using history.
History did not use him, he used history.
Yeah, and I like Billy a lot too, Billy Beck.
I just finished that.
Do you find that when you read other contemporary fiction writers that you read it kind of like a carpenter might examine?
I do.
Like a watchmaker looks like a watch.
I don't read it.
I read it hard.
Hard on the book.
But you're studying it to see what... You're not reading it just for pleasure or for... No.
You're really trying to figure out, not figure out, but study... Even Robert Parker, I take a part.
Really?
And I find I can learn about dialogue from him.
He really writes down exactly what people say.
And that sounds easy, but it's very difficult.
No, it's good dialogue.
It's so wonderful because it doesn't draw attention to itself.
Exactly.
But when it's contrived, it's the focus you've ever seen, you know.
I feel that very precisely.
Did you read The Bookman's Way, the John Donning, about the first division?
Yeah, I did, yeah.
That dialogue was really canned, really contrived.
And I'm kind of, well,
But he did very well, you know.
Books on books, I have to say, do exceedingly.
In fact, I'm... His books go out of nowhere.
Book to Die, I guess.
Those first editions are like $100 now.
That first book, people would expect it to do anything.
I would get off on that.
I've also read that...
that you don't see your writing as a cathartic experience, even though there are a lot of residences from your own life.
Is that a fear?
Yeah.
I think I look at writing as my daily companion.
I have my husband and my children.
And then I have the writing.
And I look at it with not so much an emotional awe, but with a cast of calder on it.
It's how I make my living.
Writing is what I do.
I read, I write, look after children.
I have a wonderful husband.
and that's about it.
I watch some soap operas, but I really don't have much of a life outside of that.
I keep things very simple.
But, Frank, can you give me some better language?
Oh, yeah.
Don't even, don't be so critical.
But this is not a cathartic.
What would you say?
We talk about this.
Well, I like the tension between the complexity of your work and the simplicity of your life.
As if five children, five dogs, two gerbils, eight gerbils, and two cats could be simple.
Something of the cold streams and the elements you write about in the last
like your own complexity of strength and sweetness.
But the life is simple and just apart from the complexity of organizing all of the people.
But Kay knows where to put the mark.
You know, people stand on the stage.
Now, Frank, obviously you knew Kay's work before you knew Kay, is that right?
Yep.
And so, I mean, if you don't mind, do you mind my getting a couple books?
No, no.
This is interesting for me.
Could you tell me a little, I mean, were you, obviously you read a lot of literature and... I used to read new books over in New Zealand in Raleigh.
I did it because I'm a lawyer and I had an unhealthy amount of plurid phrases in my legal way.
I was looking for a way to supplement that.
I read books and reviewed and knew about Chad.
As I said before, I like going to bed with a good court, but it's even better to go to bed with a great writer.
That's great clothes.
Great.
Great bed.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, that's fine.
That's good.
I think it's one of the writers of the New Testament who said the word made flesh.
Did you contrive to meet her?
I would have been necessary, but it wasn't necessary, because we were both, she was the writer in residence for the library at the school in Raleigh, and I was president on the board.
got asked to introduce her.
This is a friend's group?
Yes.
And we got to know each other that way.
When I met her, she was bulging with her third child.
She was nine months pregnant.
Nine months, almost to the day.
So cute.
Big ankles.
I put only 65 pounds.
Which school was this?
North Carolina State.
Yeah, I'm the past just outgoing president of the Friends of the Goddard Library.
Clark came with me.
I'm speaking now.
I interviewed her a number of times, which gave me a lot of opportunity to think about her and her work.
And I like that.
So, what otherwise, just briefly, this is not an interview with your husband, but it is a nice difference.
What other writers do you read?
I read a lot of history and biography as well as literature.
When I finished college, I went to, I taught in Athens for a year, and liked the modern Greek poets.
Athens, Greece?
Greece, I mentioned.
Being a Greek-American, I... Oh, yeah.
Interesting.
Well, we did read that new Patricia Cornwall book all at one time.
Anyway, you work now with Faith Sale.
Yes.
You're a wonderful editor.
Do you find that working with an editor, I mean, do you work in the traditional Max Perkins kind of editor kind of way?
Well, she and I do.
I send her about, what did you say, 50 pages at a time, Frank?
Yes.
About 50 pages.
And we work on it that way, but with a Civil War book.
I think I'm going to be a big girl and write the whole thing on my very own and then send it to her.
Do you do this with any degree of anxiety at all?
In terms of what her response might be?
Is it a... I can read her mind.
It is.
We can read each other's minds.
What does an editor bring to her?
I'm not a fiction writer.
A wonderful second-guessing, necessary second-guessing.
She comes behind me and points to places in the manuscript, say a place I remember specifically in which I had
described the character quickly and she thought that he needed to be explored more and she said, you need more here.
And within a few minutes I had rewritten, I had written a new paragraph explaining this very minor character and she has me open up the story.
And about every three or four pages, she'll put her finger down and say, I want to know more.
And she causes, literally, causes me to think.
Causes being an operative verb.
Let's talk a bit about this novel, because it is interesting.
Tell me about the genesis of this world search.
Yeah.
It started out as two books that were joined together and I didn't realize it.
There were two books told in alternating chapters.
The girl's childhood and then her adulthood and I had the girl grow up and be abused by her husband.
Last October, my editor and I talked and we realized that
I had two books and they needed to be split.
So I sat at the dining room table and separated the story into two stacks.
And then the stack that seemed to be close enough to being a novel, I kept that stack and I threw the other stack away.
What was the other stack?
About Hattie growing up and being abused by her husband.
page after page after page of being a victim.
It was awful, just awful.
So why was it in there?
Because I'm the type of writer who has to write through a lot of material to get to what's good.
This book went through eight drafts.
or is it being kept in the drawer for future use?
No, I threw it away and erased it from the computer.
I never wanted to see it again.
So it may have, in some stage, been two books, but really it's still one book.
Yeah, yeah.
Maybe it was a process of learning.
I mean, would you say that
this material that you wrote about, Hattie, is still just part of her life, in spite of her history?
It's part of her, yeah, it's part of her unwritten history.
Which you have to know, don't you?
And I have to know what becomes of her, and that's the only reason that it was necessary for me to write that other material that probably took a year of my life, and four hours a day for a year is a lot of time.
and then to take that material and throw it away.
That's one of the hardest things I do as a writer, but it is better to throw it away than put it in the book and have it bring down the quality of the book.
Well, it may have been work that you threw away, but it wasn't wasted work.
Yes.
It certainly was part of the process of creating it.
I can think of one chapter that my daughter erased by mistake.
That was totally lost on my computer.
That I didn't mean to throw away.
That was a chapter that had to be rewritten.
So you have these two things.
Now, was this your conclusion, or was this working in concert with the editor, where you decided this was irrelevant?
It was my decision and then she called and the same day we reached the same conclusion.
And as late as October the book was still pretty much a mess.
All the material was there but it was in the wrong place and I went to New York and we figured out what should happen first.
clearly this bookend wasn't that, you don't plot these things in advance, do you have to say they emerge?
No, I'm gonna, I think I'm gonna outline the Civil War book daily in the morning, write about what I'm gonna do that day, and I think
That's going to be the most wholesome way to write that book, because it will, anytime you're dealing with Sherman, things can get out of hand.
Is it a matter of, I think I've also read where you really don't know what, obviously you know what the next book is going to be, the Civil War book.
Is this the next book, by the way?
That's the next book.
And so you expect this will take a couple, two, three years?
Two years.
Uh-huh.
So you know what that one is.
But when you sit down to say, well, okay, I've got a contract to do another book, my next book, do you know what this book is?
Or is this a kind of, some kind of an alchemy that takes place where you, the creative process kicks in and stories kind of, you pull them out of midair, you know, as kids as a musician?
I start hearing language.
I start,
Do you relate the language with the character?
I do.
I build a character around a voice and then pretty soon a name will come into my mind and things emerge slowly.
People, characters step out of shadows and make themselves known.
And then I can write about them.
I can follow them around and see what occurs.
And I'm starting to feel some of that excitement with the Civil War book.
Are you having to do much historical research?
Oh, yes.
Because you've done that also.
I guess you mentioned historical work on World War II.
I've been researching since January 1st, and I have one more good size.
diary to read, and then I'll be ready.
A published diary?
A published diary, yes.
Published by the North Carolina archives.
They're not widely distributed.
But you're looking for insights into... I'm looking for what they dressed, how much the food cost, domestic detail, and also idiosyncrasies of 19th century language which were abundant.
A book you might want to look into, just as a reference to it, because you probably already know it, is the Harvard University American Regional Dictionary.
It's three volumes now.
Really, it's American regional language from very specific parts of the country.
I know Bruce Old used that as a reference to this John Brown book, and you should take a look into it.
American, it's the Harvard University.
It's up to three volumes.
It's kind of like an OED
of Americanisms, and you'll really find some... Harvard University Press.
Yeah, Harvard University Press.
If you'd give me a card or something, I'll send you the exam or a fact or something.
I'd be happy to send you the stuff on it.
Oh, good.
Do you have a PO box or something?
Okay, it's 918-Cowper, C-O-W-P-E-R, Droz, Raleigh.
27608.
Okay, good.
I have quite a few Southern papers, by the way, to take my call.
I work for a while.
I form my own syndicated newspapers, and I have specifically targeting university towns.
So I'm in Knoxville every week, and I'm in Gainesville, and I'm in Charlottesville, and Tallahassee is particularly interested in my pieces on women, so I'm kind of a little selfless from there.
and Salt Lake City, and Toledo, and Eugene, Oregon, and all of them.
So I think this would be a very interesting piece for them.
Going back to the two novels, the two books from which you instilled this one, was that theme of the daughter trying to understand the relationship with the mother, was that the most
more powerful?
Was this something that you started out with when you always said it?
It was always there, and it became the overwhelming predominant thing.
I'm not sure what the overwhelming theme of the Civil War book is going to be, but I hope I understand soon, because it is hard to start writing without having a
general idea.
I'm just going to start when I get back writing down what people say and hope that something occurs.
I haven't asked you all, other interviewers have, and I've read this stuff about the questions of the autobiographical residences that are in here, may or may not be in your work.
Do you find
Was this an attempt in your part to understand your own relationship with your mother?
No, no, it wasn't.
And I think I've been pretty consistent saying that.
But I did that with Ellen Foster.
I made peace with that relationship.
And in the Fights and Sain, I wanted to write about
a mother and a daughter who were estranged by this illness and who came back together.
Isn't that right, Frank?
But you said, not looking back, but looking forward to project how the girls might be.
Yeah.
Sometimes when I was writing this book, I would imagine my children 20 years from now
And what they would say about me is the illness that I have, that the main character also has, got away with me, carried me away.
And I could imagine how they would feel.
So I would sit around and imagine the worst and write it down.
But that does not occur.
I couldn't be closer to those girls.
But it is a what if.
What if I forgot their birthdays?
What if I didn't defend my son?
What if?
Did you have to do much research on mental illness?
No, not at all on mental illness.
I did research electroconvulsive therapy.
because since it was written from the point of view of a doctor, I wanted to make sure I got the technical end of it correctly.
And then just briefly, obviously relationships are a fundamental concern of yours.
Is this something that we maybe can expose that, why that is an aspect we see in?
I think so.
I think that it's one of the... I think writing about the way we treat each other is as important as writing about the mysteries of the human heart.
And those are really...
only two things that I know how to do, so I'm sure I'll continue to do them.
But I do want to hurry and get back to a book with history in it.
I really missed history this time.
That's great.
And I read someplace that you said reading Marquez helped you?
Yes, certainly did.
As a matter of fact, I need to start back on A Hundred Years of Solitude.
How specifically did that help you?
I learned how to use detail, how the way light falls on the floor can create a mood for an entire scene.
And also I learned how to use magic
And I always toy a little bit with that in my stories.
And this, not for my piece, but have you heard Mary Carr's book?
That patron, The Liar's Club?
I just got it.
Someone sent it and I haven't read it yet.
Very interesting.
Yeah.
It is a, you know, a global relationship.
Mm-hmm.
Well, I'm not going to take up any more of your time.
Well, thank you.
I want to give you this recommendation for you, although you've probably read it, Correlli's Mandolin.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Yeah.
Wonderful book.
And I wish to have gotten more attention than it did.
I started Joseph Heller, came to Raleigh at Carrie's invitation last year.
I asked him,
because I spent the time in Greece, and we were talking about Catch-22, and he recommended it.
He did a, and I did a pretty nice interview with him last year in New York on the sequel to Catch-22, which I liked.
Oh, me too.
I did.
I mean, I liked, actually, I liked most of his work.
And the poor man had the...